[{'News Title': 'Generations | March 23rd & 24th | SLC, UT', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\nOQ Measures is a proud Emerald Partner Sponsor of the upcoming Generations 2020 event.\nDate: March 23rd & 24th, 2020\nLocation: Salt Palace Convention Center, 100 So. West Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah\nInnovative Formats\n\nInternational & National Experts\nUp to 21.75 CE/CME Hours – Inc. Ethics & Suicide Prevention\nLarge Topic Span w/Choice of Depth & Content Targets\nNew, Experiential Escapes\nIn-Depth Workshop Options\n\n\xa0\n\xa0\n\n'}, {'News Title': 'Is Routine Outcome Feedback Informing Your Practice? (Part 2 of 2)', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\nIs Routine Outcome Feedback Informing Your Practice? (Part 2 of 2)\nLast week we learned about Dr. Tony Rousmaniere’s heartbreaking experience with Grace – a client that unexpectedly died of a drug overdose, prompting a career crisis for Tony, which drove him to find routine outcome monitoring (ROM) to measure mental health vital signs using client feedback.\nMany years after Grace’s death, Tony began work with a client named June. At that point in his career, being inspired by brilliant researchers that developed what is essentially psychotherapy’s version of “Moneyball” – ROM using predictive algorithms – he had embraced a new, empirical approach to therapy.\nJune had been suffering from symptoms of anxiety, depression and social isolation her entire life. She’d recently dropped out of community college, and her parents were controlling, religious fundamentalists.\nTherapy sessions with a shy and quiet June seemed to start off well enough for Rousmaniere. She seemed truly interested in learning skills to reduce her anxiety, reported practicing her skills, but never made eye contact with Tony. When called upon for feedback at the end of each session, June carefully told him therapy was helpful.\nBut when Tony checked the graph on her clinician report one session, he did not anticipate that June’s chart would show a red alert status – her case was off-track. The system had predicted she was at high risk of experiencing a negative outcome that could include deterioration or suicide.\nSkepticism was Rousmaniere’s gut reaction since the algorithms had contradicted his instincts. June had repeatedly told him that therapy was helpful. So at the beginning of their next session, Tony asked her how she was doing, and after some persistence, was able to get June to admit uncomfortably that she thought she was getting worse and blamed herself. June had deteriorated, and Tony realized without the program, he never would have identified she was at-risk.\nDr. Rousmaniere’s experience with June is a common one for therapists all over the world. The success of OQ Measures’ founder, Dr. Michael Lambert’s, research in measuring mental health vital signs ignited a flood of practitioners to adopt use of routine outcome feedback using metrics that studies show have significantly improved effectiveness of psychotherapy, reducing dropout rates and shortening the length of treatment.\nBut not all therapists have buy-in. Like the widespread adoption of the thermometer to the medical field back in the 19th century – 250 years AFTER its invention – use of psychotherapy metrics and feedback systems has been slow. Despite dozens of studies being published that heavily support the benefits of measuring mental health vital signs (many of them led by Dr. Michael Lambert and Dr. Gary Burlingame from OQ Measures), many therapists are still skeptical that a web-based software program like the OQ®-Analyst can capture the nuances of psychotherapy, and are fearful to have a light shown on their outcomes.\nIn 2003, Ann Garland of UC San Diego, led a study and found that among a sample of therapists in San Diego County who received outcome scores from client feedback, ninety-two percent did not use the data. A 2013 paper by the University at Albany’s James Boswell and associates found “Surveys spanning different countries indicate that few clinicians actually employ [routine outcome feedback measurement] in their day-to-day work.”\nThere are very few, if any, recent studies that contain any solid data on therapists measuring mental health vital signs, but Rousmaniere maintains from his own anecdotal impression that usage of metrics and feedback remains lamentably low among therapists. So he went looking for examples of clinics implementing routine outcome measurement and feedback and was led to Robbie Babins-Wagner, the CEO of the Calgary Counselling Centre, a large community mental health organization in Western Canada.\nBabins-Wagner has over 40 years of clinical experience. She began her search for new and innovative ways to improve the CCC upon her hiring back in 1992, when she found Lambert and Burlingame’s OQ system, and implemented psychotherapy metrics across the organization with the hope the data from their routine outcome feedback would help create a “climate for therapist improvement.”\nBabins-Wagner analyzed and aggregated the CCC’s data collected from a four-year trial, and found that only half of their therapists were using the OQ system – even though everyone had been instructed to. Skepticism was rampant at the CCC for those who mistrusted metrics, opting for the habitual comfort of their own professional intuition. This was easy for the skeptics to get away with over the course of the trial, due to the traditionally private and protected nature of the therapy room.\nPatiently, Babins-Wagner listened to her therapists’ concerns, and applied their feedback to improve and streamline implementation of the OQ system, then made collecting outcome data mandatory.\nForty percent of the therapists resigned within just a few months.\nBabins-Wagner’s perseverance paid off, however; steadily improving the CCC’s clinical effectiveness each year, for seven years, according to a study led by Simon Goldberg of the University of Wisconsin at Madison. Yet despite the conclusive evidence that using data improves outcomes, adjusting to a new way of working remains difficult for many therapists, even today.\nA counselor at the CCC, Michelle Keough, told Rousmaniere that she had been one of the skeptics, but over time, she realized the system actually improves communication and she can’t imagine not using it in her practice now. According to Keough, many of the trainees she supervises follow the same path of apprehension she did, and eventually embrace the OQ system.\nDr. Rousmaniere understands intuitive reluctance to measure outcomes with metrics very well – it’s unpleasant, humbling, and sometimes even humiliating to have blind spots brought to light, he says. It requires diligence for any therapist to fight their own assumptions and expectations, and put their trust in the data.\nBut while the difficulty to override gut instincts persists, Rousmaniere, Babins-Wagner, Michael Lambert, Gary Burlingame, and other proponents of measuring mental health vital signs are paving the way for therapists, from interns to psychologists, to harness the ability to predict deteriorations and dropouts among their patients using routine outcome feedback systems like the OQ®-Analyst.\nIn June’s case – unlike Grace – her life was likely saved by metrics and performance feedback when she triggered a red alert one day.\nTony trusted the data despite his intuition, dug deep into her case notes, got her permission to record a session, analyzed the video with an expert, and was advised that he was in a “top-down relationship” with June. Rousmaniere had positioned himself into a teacher role, with June attempting to be a “good student by minimizing her symptoms.” She had been holding her stomach during sessions, indicating that her anxiety was causing nausea. And like a good student, she carefully practiced the skills Tony had taught her, but never actually communicated how she felt when she did so. June had not been telling Tony about her discomfort out of deference.\nSo Rousmaniere went back to the drawing board. He approached June as an equal, helped her acknowledge her pain and anxiety rather than defer to him, though she struggled with the constant pull to shift back into the submissive role of a good student. Tony struggled himself with the pull to teach her skills rather than listen more carefully as her equal. But they worked together using the routine outcome feedback program as their guide when they found June’s symptoms would worsen, and her responses to questionnaires would trigger alerts. Tony would video tape more sessions and fix any errors he identified, and June’s anxiety steadily lessened over the following year.\nTwo years later, June graduated from college with honors, and had her final session with Rousmaniere. Spanning the years of Tony’s career, the Grace and June cases are positioned at two ends of the psychotherapy outcome spectrum: one stands as a warning, and the other stands as a success. The OQ®-Analyst has the power to save lives.\nWe highly recommend a demo of the OQ®-Analyst, widely considered the world’s gold standard routine outcome feedback web-based monitoring solution. OQ Measures not only offers adult outcome questionnaires, but youth/adolescent and group outcome questionnaires as well, in addition to clinical support tools designed to be used in conjunction with OQ instruments.\nYou can email us at\xa0sales@oqmeasures.com, or select an available date and time here to have a demonstration:\xa0https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/OQMeasuresLLC@oqmeasures.com/bookings/\nYou can access the full Atlantic Monthly article\xa0https://tgam.ca/2Y1ScQK.\n\n'}, {'News Title': 'Is Routine Outcome Feedback Informing Your Practice? | Part 1 of 2', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\nIs Routine Outcome Feedback Informing Your Practice?\nThe OQ®-Analyst has the power to\xa0save\xa0lives. This is the true story of Grace, and how Dr. Tony Rousmaniere, noted psychologist, author, podcaster, and expert in patient feedback and routine outcome monitoring, came to the conclusion years ago that measuring mental health vital signs with the right instruments can often help prevent heartbreaking case outcomes.\nFirst published in\xa0The Atlantic Monthly, “What Your Therapist Doesn’t Know,”went viral\xa0across the psychotherapy world. In the popular article, Dr. Rousmaniere attributes much of the groundwork laid in the outcome measurement research field to Dr. Michael Lambert.\xa0\xa0 Dr. Lambert, along with colleagues Dr. Gary Burlingame and OQ Measures’ CEO, Sue Jenkins, are at the forefront of routine outcome monitoring with OQ Measures’ OQ®-Analyst platform, widely known as the gold standard in big data psychology tech.\nDr. Rousmaniere was a young therapist in training and Grace was a heroin addict who had been clean for roughly six months. At the start of psychotherapy with Tony, Grace was in an uphill battle as an unemployed single mother addicted to drugs who had been in several violent relationships. Retaining custody of her son was her primary motive for bravely attempting to get clean and putting the pieces of her life back together.\nAttending Narcotics Anonymous meetings and reducing anxiety were central to Grace’s therapy, since the anxiety had driven her to drug abuse. At first, progress seemed positive, and each week she reported her successes: attending NA meetings, obtaining employment, and enjoying a healthy relationship with her new boyfriend.\nBoth Tony and Grace refused to accept failure, because the risk she’d lose custody of her son in the event of relapse was high. Grace was often asked for feedback about her therapy, and assured Tony it was proving productive. He noticed though, that her restrained enthusiasm seemed desperate and forced.\nTony received weekly supervision at his community counseling training site from a perceptive and intelligent psychologist, with decades of experience helping addicts, and he valued her guidance enormously. Several months into treatment, Tony told his supervisor, “It’s remarkable how quickly she’s improving,” and proudly informed her Grace was doing so well that he had agreed to cut their sessions from weekly to biweekly.\nBut Tony’s supervisor cautiously reminded him, “Getting clean is hard, but staying clean is harder.”\nHer concern became reality, soon thereafter, when Grace no-showed for three straight therapy appointments after a heroin relapse. Grace’s life unraveled over the next several months, losing her job, her boyfriend, and repeatedly turning back to drugs. But she was still committed to therapy, attending faithfully, while Tony grasped for every technique in therapy he could find, with no success. Grace was determined, insisting she could do it. She told him, “I’ve just got to stay positive.”\nGrace died of a drug overdose a few months after her relapse, and her son was put in foster care. Tony was devastated, igniting an internal crisis in him. “What could I have done differently?” he asked himself. “How could I become a more effective therapist?”\nDr. Michael Lambert and Dr. Gary Burlingame and the OQ Measures team have been at the forefront of developing psychotherapy metrics – an uncharted territory for Tony early in his career, but the answer to his professional crisis at the time.\nThe two world class researchers from Brigham Young University are highly regarded around the world as the pioneers of routine outcome monitoring research, and Dr. Lambert was the first person to introduce the measurement of mental health vital signs to the world in the early 90’s.\nOver the past few decades, Dr. Lambert and Dr. Burlingame developed a system in which therapy clients take a 45-item questionnaire, the OQ®-45.2,\xa0before each appointment, and OQ Measures’ web-based platform, the OQ®-Analyst, then utilizes the data to tabulate responses. The OQ®-45.2 results are then displayed immediately in a clinician report featuring a graph that represents the trajectory of each client’s symptoms, in relation to an expected recovery curve determined by the baseline score, allowing his or her therapist to track the progress being made.\nDrawing on historical data from thousands of cases, Dr. Lambert and Dr. Burlingame created algorithms predicting when clients are at risk of deterioration. If clients appear to be at risk based on their answers to\xa0the OQ®-45.2, the OQ®-Analyst alerts therapists using color-coded early warning alerts: red for risk of dropout or deterioration, yellow for less-than-expected progress. In over 15 randomized clinical trials, the algorithms are able to predict—with 85 to 100 percent accuracy—which clients will deteriorate.\nThe OQ® system aids therapy in two primary ways:\nFirst, it provides performance feedback that therapists too often lack because many clients would prefer to report worsening symptoms to a computer—even if they know that their therapist will see the results—rather than disappoint therapists face-to-face.\nThe second benefit comes from metrics: Risk alerts allow therapists to adjust treatment plans, and can help them compensate for natural overconfidence and clinical blind spots.\nTo understand the power of the OQ®-Analyst alert status, stay tuned for our next installment of “Is Routine Outcome Feedback Informing Your Practice?” and we will continue the story of Dr. Tony Rousmaniere, and how he overcame his disappointment over Grace’s case, changing the course of his career for the better through the practice of measuring mental health vital signs…..\nWe highly recommend a demo of the OQ®-Analyst, widely considered the world’s gold standard routine outcome monitoring web-based solution. OQ Measures not only offers adult outcome questionnaires, but youth/adolescent and group outcome questionnaires as well, in addition to clinical support tools designed to be used in conjunction with OQ instruments.\nYou can email us at\xa0sales@oqmeasures.com, or select an available date and time here to have a demonstration:\xa0https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/OQMeasuresLLC@oqmeasures.com/bookings/\nYou can access the full Atlantic Monthly article\xa0https://tgam.ca/2Y1ScQK.\n\n'}, {'News Title': 'AMERICAN GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY ASSOCIATION TO AWARD DISTINGUISHED FELLOWSHIPS TO GARY BURLINGAME, PHD, CGP, FAGPA AND LES GREENE, PHD, CGP, LFAGPA', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\nAMERICAN GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY ASSOCIATION TO AWARD DISTINGUISHED FELLOWSHIPS TO GARY BURLINGAME, PHD, CGP, FAGPA AND LES GREENE, PHD, CGP, LFAGPA New York, February 19, 2019— The American Group Psychotherapy Association (AGPA) announced that Gary Burlingame, PhD, CGP, FAGPA and Les Greene, PhD, CGP, LFAGPA will be awarded Distinguished Fellowship in the Association at its upcoming AGPA Connect 2019 in Los Angeles, February 25 – March 2 at the Westin Bonaventure Hotel. The award presentation will take place during the Anne and Ramon Alonso Plenary Address on Friday, March 1, 2019 at 8:30 AM. Distinguished Fellowship is the highest honor bestowed by the Association, recognizing outstanding leadership and contributions to the field of group psychotherapy. Full Press Release.\xa0\n\n'}, {'News Title': 'Keys to great group therapy', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\n\n\nKeys to great group therapy\nSeasoned psychologists offer their expertise on the art and skill of leading successful group therapy\nBy Amy Novotney\nApril 2019, Vol 50, No. 4\nPrint version: page 66\xa0\n\n\n\n\n\nDecades of research, including more than 50 clinical trials, have shown that group therapy is as effective as individual therapy for many conditions, including depression, obesity and social anxiety. Partly as a result of that research, demand for group therapy is up, and many new psychologists are being asked to lead groups in hospital and community mental health settings.\nYet the ability to run therapy groups is a special skill. In fact, APA’s\xa0Commission for the Recognition of Specialties and Proficiencies in Professional Psychology\xa0includes\xa0group psychology and group psychotherapy\xa0as an evidence-based specialty.\n“Group therapy isn’t just individual therapy in a group,” says Martyn Whittingham, PhD, an Ohio counseling psychologist and president of\xa0APA’s Div. 49 (Society of Group Psychology and Group Psychotherapy). “It has its own techniques, its own processes and its own strategies, and unless you really understand those, you’re going to struggle. You need to be part of a community of people who are committed to learning and growing in this work.”\nUnfortunately, many psychologists receive little training in the area.\n“In most graduate programs, group therapy is an elective course, so it’s possible for students to graduate without knowing anything about group dynamics or group therapy, and take a job where they’re running groups,” says George Washington University psychology professor Cheri Marmarosh, PhD, Div. 49’s president-elect. “But without training, these students don’t know how to intervene when problems arise among members of the group, and they may not have adequate supervision. They’re just expected to go in and do it based on their individual psychotherapy training.”\nHow can psychologists step in to provide group therapy and ensure that their leadership meets patients’ needs? Group therapy experts offer their advice:\nGet training.\xa0Taking a course on group therapy or group dynamics provides essential background on group development, conflict and how to address it in groups, as well as how to foster group cohesion, identify and repair ruptures, and deal with diversity in groups, says Marmarosh. Such training can also help psychologists better understand how to screen potential group members and how to prepare members for what to expect during the sessions.\nTo find such training, visit the APA Div. 49 website (www.apadivisions.org/division-49) as well as the webinars and continuing-education courses offered by the American Group Psychotherapy Association (www.agpa.org).\nCompile the right group.\xa0Not every patient is an appropriate candidate for every group, Whittingham says. That’s why it’s important for the psychologist to conduct a high-quality screening and preparation interview with each potential group member before the group begins. Before these meetings, Whittingham suggests using tools such as the 19-item\xa0Group Readiness Questionnaire\xa0(GRQ), which is designed to identify risk factors for potential dropout or poor outcomes. This kind of assessment can help inform therapists’ clinical judgment so they can decide whether they need to spend more time preparing members or redirecting them to a treatment where they are more likely to be successful. “This can give you a quick look at issues that are predictive of dropout, such as low motivation or a specific type of interpersonal problem such as overt hostility or a tendency to disclose too deeply too quickly,” Whittingham says. If their assessment and individual interview suggest they may not be a good fit for the current group, perhaps their needs would be better served in individual therapy, or in a different group setting.\nIt’s also important to educate your referral sources about inclusion or exclusion criteria for group therapy, he says.\n“You wouldn’t want to get a general group therapy referral for a client who has just gone through an intense sexual assault, for example, until they’ve perhaps gone through at least some individual therapy,” Whittingham says. “These types of clients might understandably have difficulty focusing on other people given what they’ve just been through themselves. So, it’s important to identify people’s readiness for group.”\nSet expectations up front.\xa0During the initial individual intake, ask clients what they expect group therapy to look like and how quickly they expect change to occur, to ensure their hopes are in line with reality, says Roger Greenberg, PhD, distinguished professor of psychology at the State University of New York Upstate Medical University. Particularly if they say they expect to feel better within a couple of weeks, it’s important to explain that change will likely occur over a period of months.\n“Remind them that it took them a while to get to the point where they were feeling uncomfortable enough to want to do something about it, and so, like everything else, it will require time to see true change,” Greenberg says.\nIt’s also important to dispel any notions that group therapy is conducted the same way it’s portrayed on television, Whittingham says.\n“Often, clients imagine it’s going to be a lot of shouting or being attacked, so leaders need to help members understand that group can actually be a really enjoyable\xa0thing where they learn a lot from other people, not just from the therapist,” he says.\nIt’s also important to prepare members for possible challenges this type of therapy can present.\nFor example, patients who avoid conflict or disengage when relationships become difficult need to know that group discussions can become difficult. “Discuss how they might react if they experience a desire to flee, and help them commit to attending a minimum number of sessions,” says Marmarosh.\nBuild cohesion quickly.\xa0Some groups more naturally lend themselves to being cohesive from the get-go. “In grief groups, for example, you don’t have to work as hard to get people to feel connected once they start talking about why they’re there,” says Whittingham. However, groups without an easily identifiable common bond—those geared toward cognitive-behavior therapy, for example—might take a bit more work to help members feel connected. One strategy group leaders can use is to break the group into pairs and have them take time during the first session to get to know each other, Whittingham says. Icebreakers that encourage members to delve deeper or have fun together can also promote group bonding.\n“Finding commonalities is crucial to building group cohesion, and sometimes these things emerge organically, but often the therapist will have to illuminate them for members by using linking techniques,” he says.\nIncluding more experienced clients in the group who have already had positive experiences with this type of therapy is another smart tactic for building cohesion.\n“Experienced patients are able to serve as models for how an ideal client would participate in the treatment, and this seems to enhance treatment participation and speed up the development of a sense of group cohesion,” Greenberg says.\nGet feedback. Research shows that therapists cannot easily predict how well a group member is doing in therapy and whether he or she will drop out, Marmarosh says.\nIn addition, the field of health care in general is moving toward outcome measurements as a way to track progress and improve outcomes. Several assessment tools—some of which are free—are available to help therapists gain insight into which clients might be at risk for treatment deterioration or dropping out of therapy altogether. These include progress monitoring measures such as the\xa0Outcome Questionnaire\n(OQ), developed by Brigham Young University psychology professors Gary Burlingame, PhD, and Michael Lambert, PhD, as well as therapeutic relationship measures such as the Group Climate Questionnaire (GCQ-S) and the Group Questionnaire (GQ).“Don’t trust that you can clinically jump into a member’s mind and know how they’re doing, because you can’t,” says Burlingame. “The data on this are very clear.”\nIdentify and address ruptures.\xa0Disagreements are almost inevitable in group therapy, but it’s important that group leaders spot and work through concerns as soon as they arise among members, Marmarosh says. Sometimes ruptures in group cohesion are obvious and confrontational, such as when a group member comments that they don’t understand how something being discussed is relevant, or if they challenge the intervention. Other times, ruptures can be more passive, with a member who begins to come late, doesn’t show for sessions, stops making eye contact or doesn’t contribute to discussions.\n“You can also look for nonverbal cues, such as eye rolling, fidgeting or just looking frustrated when other people in the group are talking,” she says.\nTo address these issues, the therapist can gently bring it up directly with the member or with the entire group by asking if others are feeling frustrated as well, Marmarosh says.\nGreenberg agrees, noting that giving clients the sense that they are an active part of the therapeutic process is one of the best ways to address discord.\n“Make sure they know that you’re willing to listen and make changes that will be in line with what the client thinks they would find helpful,” he says.\nLearn more\xa0about group therapy by visiting the website of APA’s Div. 49 (Society of Group Psychology and Group Psychotherapy),\xa0www.apadivisions.org/division-49/index.\n\n\n\nFurther reading\n\n\nFeedback in Group Psychotherapy\nPsychotherapy, special issue,2018\nHow and Why Are Some Therapists Better Than Others? Understanding Therapist Effects\nCastonguay, L., & Hill, C. (Eds.), APA, 2017\nAttachment in Group Psychotherapy\nMarmarosh, C., et al., APA, 2013\n\n\n\n\n\n'}, {'News Title': 'Generations 2019 Behavorial Health and Addiction Interventions for professionals', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\nOQ Measures is a proud Emerald Partner Sponsor of the upcoming Generations 2019 event.\nDate: April 15th & 16th, 2019\nLocation: Salt Palace Convention Center, 100 So. West Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah\n\nBrochure 2019\n\n'}, {'News Title': 'RECAP : RETHINKING THERAPY: HOW 45 QUESTIONS CAN REVOLUTIONIZE MENTAL HEALTH CARE IN CANADA', 'Details': '\n\n\n \n\nThe Globe and Mail, Canada’s most popular newspaper, released a feature article on April 7th entitled “Rethinking Therapy: How 45 Questions Can Revolutionize Mental Health in Canada” about the groundbreaking use of routine outcome measurement and feedback-informed therapy trends impacting mental and behavioral health outcomes not only in Canada, but across the world.\nSpecifically, writer Erin Anderssen reports how the OQ®-45.2, OQ Measures’ flagship adult outcome measure, developed by Dr. Michael Lambert, has been widely used across Canada in recent years to both improve outcomes as well as show reportable data for organizations monitoring treatment progress, most notably, the country’s most forward-thinking mental health data crunching powerhouses, Veterans Affairs Canada and the Calgary Counselling Centre.\nGovernment agencies around the world, in particular, are welcoming routine outcome monitoring information systems as the most accurate and effective way to assess treatment effectiveness. Anderssen highlights England’s $630 million publicly funded standardized psychotherapy program rollout in 2008 implemented at every clinic and every session across the nation, opening 60 centers and seeing 950,000 adults per year suffering from depression and anxiety.\nCanada and other countries around the world have been slower than England to adopt measures to track progress in therapy, but the Calgary clinic was ahead of the curve, instituting outcome measurement as early as 2004. And in December of 2017, Quebec announced a new initiative for routine outcome monitoring with a $35 million price-tag as part of a public coverage program. Similarly in Ontario, a small pilot program modeled after England’s national rollout was recently launched, reflecting promising momentum in monitoring and reporting outcomes by Canada’s government agencies.\nAnderssen informs in the piece that a big contributor to the slow adoption of measuring mental health vital signs is an overly optimistic view of providers abilities to predict treatment failures, and an over-estimation of client improvement. A 2012 survey in the U.S. found that psychologists estimated that 85% of their caseload improved in their care, but research has found that only about 4% of the time can they predict treatment failures – a consistency that exists from interns up to Ph.Ds.\nDr. Michael Lambert’s research exposed this disconcerting fact, telling The Globe and Mail, “Almost all therapists think they can predict negative outcomes, and they are horrible at it. They can hardly identify a single case when asked to do so.”\nMental and behavioral health measurement-based care initiatives that fill in these glaring blindspots in therapy are not only achievable for large agencies and governments to implement, but they can assist even private practitioners as they can help drastically improve outcomes on a case-by-case basis by giving the individual clinician tools to help guide their treatment plans, and alert them when clients are off-track and at risk of treatment failures. Very similar to tools discovered in medicine over the centuries, outcome measures such as the OQ®-45.2 provide mental health data to the clinician that was previously unavailable to practitioners in the field up until recent years.\nDavid Ross, Veterans Affairs Canada’s retired Manager and National Clinic Coordinator of VAC’s Operational Stress Injury (OSI) clinics told Anderssen, “The adoption of vital sign metrics is what pulled medicine out of the dark ages two centuries ago.” And as Mike Lambert likes to put it – the thermometer was not in use regularly by doctors until 200 years had passed since its invention.\nDeveloping perhaps the most advanced data sets in the world for tracking progress of military veterans in therapy, Dr. Ross asserts that therapists should be able to identify when their clients are showing recovery or improvement in therapy. “If they can’t,” he advises, “head for the hills.” Dr. Ross and other advocates of routine outcome monitoring like Robbie Babins-Wagner, CEO of the Calgary Counselling Centre, compare the questionnaires to clinical tests used in other areas of medicine, and insist their wider adoption could transform therapy.\nThough questionnaires are not meant to replace a clinician’s intuition and experience, they do provide a critical tool to enhance treatment outcomes. The purpose of outcome measures is to capture reliable data on client progress and show clinicians whether a treatment plan is effective or should be altered to avoid deterioration by the end of treatment.\n“No tool is perfect,” says Babins-Wagner, “and no tool covers everything. But a good tool is better than no tool at all” she told Anderssen.\nOQ Measures licenses are affordable for all clinicians with pricing based on number of unique active clients seen per year. Contact the OQ Measures team at sales@oqmeasures.com for a quote and demo of the OQ®-Analyst.\nThe article in full can be viewed here.\nReferences:\nAnderssen, E. (2018, April). Rethinking therapy: How 45 questions can revolutionize mental health care in Canada. The Globe and Mail, Retrieved from https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-rethinking-therapy-how-45-questions-can-revolutionize-mental-health/\n\n'}]